# A Time-Series Gaussian Process Model with Spatially Correlated Hyperparameters

This repository contains the R implementation of the modeling framework proposed in the research paper:

**“A Time-Series Model for Areal Data Using Area-Specific Gaussian Processes with Spatially Correlated Hyperparameters.”**

The code allows users to run the proposed spatio-temporal model and reproduce the analysis workflow presented in the paper.

To illustrate the implementation, the repository includes a **simulated toy dataset** inspired by malaria incidence observed in Mozambique. The dataset contains observations for **16 districts** within a province and **60 monthly time points**, corresponding to the period from January 2017 to December 2021.

---

## Repository structure

### `data/`

This folder contains the files required to run the example analysis:

- `dataset_toyexample.RDS`  
  Simulated dataset used to demonstrate the modeling framework.

- `shape_file.RDS`  
  Spatial polygon data for the 16 districts used in the toy example.

- `input_files_init_values/`  
  Contains initialization files generated by running the script  
  `District_specific_models.R`.

  These files include:
  
  - Maximum likelihood estimates of the district-specific covariance parameters  
    (`sigma_i^2`, `phi_i`, and `nu_i^2` in log-scale)
  - Estimated covariance matrices for these parameters.

  These values serve as **initial values for the MCMC sampler**.

---

## How to run the model

To reproduce the example analysis, execute the scripts in the following order:

1. `District_specific_models.R`  
   Estimates district-specific Gaussian process models and generates initial values.

2. `Execution.R`  
   Runs the MCMC sampler for the hierarchical spatio-temporal model.

3. `posterior_analysis.R`  
   Performs convergence checks, calculate the posterior predictive distribution and generates summaries of the results.

The files `Inputs_sampler.R` and `sampler.R` contain the functions that construct the sampler inputs and implement the MCMC algorithm.

---

## Custom datasets

The model can be adapted to other datasets with relatively minor modifications.  
In particular, users may need to update:

- input data paths
- adapt names of the ID variables to distinguish the spatial and temporal units 
- MCMC settings

These parameters can be modified directly in the scripts `Execution.R` and `posterior_analysis.R`.

---

## Dependencies

The code requires the following R packages:
bayesplot,
coda,
forecast,
geoR,
ggplot2,
invgamma,
patchwork,
PrevMap,
sf,
spdep,
stringi,
tidyverse,
zoo
